RFC: Superseding public/private dependencies (#3516)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/3516-public-private-dependencies.md

whatever edition next comes up after stabilization.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The crates ecosystem has greatly expanded since Rust 1.0. With that, a few patterns for
dependencies have evolved that challenge the existing dependency declaration
system in Cargo and Rust. The most common problem is that a crate `A` depends on another
crate `B` but some of the types from crate `B` are exposed through the API in crate `A`.

- Brittle semver compatibility as `A` might not have intended to expose `B`,
  like when adding `impl From<B::error> for AError` for convenience in using `?` in the implementation of `A`.
- When self-hosting documentation, you may want to render documentation for all of your public dependencies as well
- When running `cargo doc`, users may way to render [documentation for their accessible dependencies](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/2025) [without the cost of their inaccessible dependencies](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/4049)
- When linting for semver compatibility [there isn't enough information to reason about dependencies](https://github.com/obi1kenobi/cargo-semver-checks/issues/121)

> Related problems not with this scenario not handled by this RFC:

Reviewer: Seems to me like there is an extra "not" here:
```suggestion
Related problems with this scenario not handled by this RFC:
```

- Poor error messages when a user directly depends on `A` and `B` but with a
  version requirement on `B` that is semver incompatible with `A`s version
  requirement on `B`.
  - See [Dependency visibility and the resolver](#rationale-and-alternatives) for why this is excluded.

> - Allow mutually exclusiev features or overly-constrained version requirements

Reviewer 2: Looks like a minor typo?

```suggestion
- Allow mutually exclusive features or overly-constrained version requirements
```

What is private is what is left after recursively walking public dependencies (`pub = true`).
We'll ignore this for other build target kinds (e.g. `bin`) as that would create extra noise.

Old cargo versions will emit a warning when this key is encountered but otherwise continue,
even if the feature is present but unstable.
While it is unstable, `cargo publish` will strip the field.

Cargo will not force a `rust-version` bump when using this feature as someone
building with an old version of cargo depending on packages that set `pub =
true` will not start to fail when upgrading to new versions of cargo.

`cargo add` will gain `--pub <bool>` flags to control this field.
When adding a dependency today, the version requirement is reused from other dependency tables within your manifest.
With this RFC, that will be extended to also checking your dependencies for any `pub` dependencies, and reusing their version requirement.
This would be most easily done by having the field in the Index but `cargo add` could also read the `.crate` files as a fallback.

## crates.io

Crates.io should show public dependencies more prominently than private ones.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> The warning message might not be the clearest in how to resolve as its emitted

Reviewer 2: This might be more readable?

```suggestion
It might not be clear how to resolve the warning, as it's emitted
```

new version of it that explains things in terms of cargo.

There are risks with the `cargo fix` approach as it requires us to take a non-machine applicable lint,
parsing out the information we need to identify the corresponding `Cargo.toml`,
and translate it into a change for `Cargo.toml`.

In the case where you depend on `foo = "300"`, there isn't a way to clarify that what is public is actually from `foo-core = "1"` without explicitly depending on it.

This doesn't cover the case where a dependency is public only if a feature is enabled.

The warning is emitted even when a `pub` item isn't accessible.

You can't definitively lint when a `pub = true` is unused since it may depend on which platform or features.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

## Misc

- `Cargo.toml`: instead of `pub` (named after the [Rust keyword](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/visibility-and-privacy.html), we could name the field `public` (like [RFC 1977]) or name the field `visibility = "<public|private>"`
  - The parallel with Rust seemed worth pursuing
  - `pub` could be seen as ambiguous with `publish`

>   - While `visibility` would offer greater flexibility, it is unclear if we need that flexibility and if the friction of any feature leveraging it would be worth it

Author: Moving @djc's comment here for a more focused conversation

> Naming nit: feels to me like going with full-on public makes more sense in this context than mirroring the pub from function/type syntax.

Author: We talked about this in the cargo team meeting and the tie breaker for `pub` is that it allows our no-MSRV-bump approach to work.  `public` is already reserved from the previous RFC's implementation.

Reviewer 3: What do you mean by the "no-MSRV-bump"? If `public` is reserved from the previous RFC (and assuming that there is substantial overlap between this RFC's meaning and that one's), how does it make sense to use a different keyword now?

Reviewer 4: Going for the worse name here feels like prioritizing short-term MSRV support over long-term readability, given how many years we've waited to use this is delaying it another year for just those that provide extreme MSRVs such a problem?

Author: We talked about this in the cargo team meeting and decided to force an MSRV bump and switch to `public`.

> - `Cargo.toml`: Instead of `pub = false` being the default and changing the warning level on an edition boundary, we could instead start with `pub = true` and change the default on an edition boundary.

Reviewer 2: This would be more helpful for crates that deny warnings, which is common in CI.

Author: Let's try to keep the conversation on the transition path in one place ([here](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3516#discussion_r1362653972)) so its easier to track everything.

>   - This would require `cargo fix` marking all dependencies as `pub = true`, while using the warning means we can limit it to only those dependencies that need it.

Author: Moving @djc's comment here for a more focused conversation

> An alternative suggested phasing in path: in current edition (and earlier?), all dependencies are public by default but you can annotate them as non-public. In 2024 edition (and later?), all dependencies are private by default and you must explicitly make them public.

Author: I believe this case is covered in the document with the downside.

If we want to more slowly roll out the transition, I feel like making it `allow` by default but putting it in the `rust-2024-compatibility` lint group would be the most idea as that keeps the noise down for people, both in warnings and in commit churn, and makes it more likely people will maintain the minimum set of `pub` dependencies.

Author: > This would be more helpful for crates that deny warnings, which is common in CI.

imo You shouldn't deny warnings in CI without pinning the Rust version otherwise you can expect breakages from time-to-time.

Author: When discussing this in the cargo team meeting, I got the impression that we wanted to be a bit cautious about how noisy this could be, so I switched it to allow-by-default with being in the `rust-2024-compatibility` lint group to make sure it gets enabled for edition migration.

- [RFC 1977] was written before Editions, `cfg` dependencies, and package renaming which can all affect it
- The resolver changes were a large part of [RFC 1977] but there are concerns with it and we feel it'd be best to decouple it, offering a faster path to stabilization

Note: The 2024 Edition is referenced in this RFC but that is a placeholder for
whatever edition next comes up after stabilization.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The crates ecosystem has greatly expanded since Rust 1.0. With that, a few patterns for
dependencies have evolved that challenge the existing dependency declaration
system in Cargo and Rust. The most common problem is that a crate `A` depends on another
crate `B` but some of the types from crate `B` are exposed through the API in crate `A`.

- Brittle semver compatibility as `A` might not have intended to expose `B`,
  like when adding `impl From<B::error> for AError` for convenience in using `?` in the implementation of `A`.
- When self-hosting documentation, you may want to render documentation for all of your public dependencies as well

> - When running `cargo doc`, users may way to render [documentation for their accessible dependencies](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/2025) [without the cost of their inaccessible dependencies](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/4049)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- When running `cargo doc`, users may want to render [documentation for their accessible dependencies](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/2025) [without the cost of their inaccessible dependencies](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/4049)
```

- When linting for semver compatibility [there isn't enough information to reason about dependencies](https://github.com/obi1kenobi/cargo-semver-checks/issues/121)

Related problems with this scenario not handled by this RFC:
- Poor error messages when a user directly depends on `A` and `B` but with a
  version requirement on `B` that is semver incompatible with `A`s version
  requirement on `B`.
  - See [Dependency visibility and the resolver](#rationale-and-alternatives) for why this is excluded.
- Allow mutually exclusive features or overly-constrained version requirements
  by not requiring private dependencies to be unified.
  - Private dependencies are not sufficient on their own for this
  - There are likely better alternatives, like [Pre-RFC: Mutually-exclusive, global features](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/pre-rfc-mutually-excusive-global-features/19618)

> - Help check for missing feature declarations by duplicating dependencies, rather than unifiying features

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Help check for missing feature declarations by duplicating dependencies, rather than unifying features
```

    #[doc(hidden)]
    pub use once_cell;
}
```
Since the proc-macro can only guarantee that the namespace `clap` is accessible,
`clap` must re-export any functionality that is needed at runtime by the generated code.
As a last-ditch way of dealing with this, a user may allow the error:
```rust
#[doc(hidden)]
#[allow(external_private_dependency)]
#[cfg(feature = "derive")]
pub mod __derive_refs {
    #[doc(hidden)]
    pub use once_cell;
}
```
A similar case is pub-in-private:
```rust
mod private {
    #[allow(external_private_dependency)]
    pub struct Foo { pub x: some_dependency::SomeType }
}
```
Though this might be worked around by reducing the visibility to `pub(crate)`.

I say "last ditch" because in most other cases,
a user would be better served by wrapping the API which would be helped with
features like `impl Trait` in type aliases if we had it.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## rustc

The main change to the compiler will be to accept a new modifier on the `--extern` flag that Cargo
supplies which marks it as a private dependency.
The modifier will be called `priv` (e.g. `--extern priv:serde`).

> The compiler then emits the lint `external_private_dependency` if it encounters private

Reviewer 5: Is this suggesting to rename the existing lint to `external_private_dependency` or is this a different lint from [`exported_private_dependencies`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/rustc/lints/listing/warn-by-default.html#exported-private-dependencies)?

For background information: It was decided during the implementation phase to change the lint name from the original RFC 1977 text. Should this all be updated to the new name?

Implementation-wise, are there any changes needed on the rustc-side?

Author: Thanks!  I tried to update everything for the current implementation and missed that one.

> Implementation-wise, are there any changes needed on the rustc-side?

I expect this section is the only change:

> `exported-private-dependencies` will be `allow` by default for pre-2024 editions.
It will be a member of the `rust-2024-compatibility` lint group so that it gets automatically picked up by `cargo fix --edition`.
In the 2024 edition, this lint will be `deny`.

It might not be clear how to resolve the warning/error, as it's emitted
by rustc but is resolved by changing information in the build system,
generally, but not always, cargo.
As a last resort, we could put a hack in cargo to intercept the lint and emit a
new version of it that explains things in terms of cargo.

There are risks with the `cargo fix` approach as it requires us to take a non-machine applicable lint,
parsing out the information we need to identify the corresponding `Cargo.toml`,
and translate it into a change for `Cargo.toml`.

In the case where you depend on `foo = "300"`, there isn't a way to clarify that what is public is actually from `foo-core = "1"` without explicitly depending on it.

This doesn't cover the case where a dependency is public only if a feature is enabled.

The warning/error is emitted even when a `pub` item isn't accessible.
We at least reduced the impact of this by not marking dependencies as private for `crate-type=["bin"]`.

You can't definitively lint when a `public = true` is unused since it may depend on which platform or features.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

## Misc

> - `Cargo.toml`: instead of `public` (like [RFC 1977]), we could name the field `pub` (named after the [Rust keyword](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/visibility-and-privacy.html) or name the field `visibility = "<public|private>"`

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- `Cargo.toml`: instead of `public` (like [RFC 1977]), we could name the field `pub` (named after the [Rust keyword](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/visibility-and-privacy.html)) or name the field `visibility = "<public|private>"`
```

  - `pub` has a nice parallel with Rust
  - `pub`: Cargo doesn't use abbreviations as much as Rust (though some are used)
  - `pub` could be seen as ambiguous with `publish`
  - `public` already is reserved and requires a `cargo_features`, meaning using it requires an MSRV bump
  - While `visibility` would offer greater flexibility, it is unclear if we need that flexibility and if the friction of any feature leveraging it would be worth it
- `rustc`: Instead of `allow` by default for pre-2024 editions, we could warn by default
  - More people would get the benefit of the feature now
  - However, this would be extremely noisy and likely make people grumpy

>   - If we did this, we'd likely want to not require an MSRV bump so people can immediately silence the warning which would require using a key besides `public` (since its already reserved) and treating the field as an unused key when the `-Z` isn't enabled.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  - If we did this, we'd likely want to not require an MSRV bump so people can immediately silence the warning which would require using a key besides `public` (since it's already reserved) and treating the field as an unused key when the `-Z` isn't enabled.
```

- More thought is needed on what happens if you have multiple versions of a package that are public (via renaming like `tokio_03` and `tokio_1`)

Related problems potentially blocked on this
- It is hoped that the resolver change would help with [cargo#9029](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/9029)
- If we allow duplication of private semver compatible dependencies, it would help with [cargo#10053](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/10053)

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

Within the cargo ecosystem:
- [cargo public-api-crates](https://github.com/davidpdrsn/cargo-public-api-crates)

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

## Help keep versions in-sync

When upgrading one dependency, you might need to upgrade another because you
use it to interact with the first, like `clap` and `clap_complete`.
The existing error messages are not great, along the lines of "expected `clap::Command`, found `clap::Command`".
Ideally, you would be presented instead with a message saying "clap_complete

> 3.4 is not compatiblw with clap 4.0, try upgrading to clap_complete 4.0".

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
3.4 is not compatible with clap 4.0, try upgrading to clap_complete 4.0".
```

Even better if we could help users do this upgrade automatically.

> As solving this, via the resolver, has been the main sticking point for [RFC 1997],

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
As solving this, via the resolver, has been the main sticking point for [RFC 1977],
```

  - For more on the complexity involved, see the thread starting at [this comment](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/44663#issuecomment-881965668)
- More thought is needed as we found that making a dependency `public = true` can be a breaking change if the caller also depends on it but with a different semver incompatible version
- More thought is needed on what happens if you have multiple versions of a package that are public (via renaming like `tokio_03` and `tokio_1`)

### Caller-declared relations

As an alternative, when declaring dependencies,
a user could [explicitly delegate the version requirement to another package](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/4641)

One possible approach for this:
```toml
[package]
name = "some-cli"

[dependencies]
clap = { from = ["clap_complete", "clap_mangen"] }
clap_complete = "3.4"
clap_mangen = "3.4"
```
When resolving the dependencies for `some-cli`,
the resolver will not explicitly choose a version for `clap` but will continue resolving the graph.
Upon completion, it will look to see what instance of `clap_complete` was
resolved and act as if that was what was specified inside of the in-memory
`clap` dependency.

> The packakge using `from` must be a public dependency of the `from` package.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The package using `from` must be a public dependency of the `from` package.
```

In this case, `clap` must be a public dependency of `clap_complete`.
If the different packages in `from` do not agree on what the package
version should resolve to (clap 3.4 vs clap 4.0), then it is an error.

Compared to the resolver doing this implicitly
- It is unclear if this would be any more difficult to implement in the resolver

> - Changing a dependency from `public = false` to `public = true` is backwards compatible because it has no affect on existing callers.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Changing a dependency from `public = false` to `public = true` is backwards compatible because it has no effect on existing callers.
```

This doesn't cover the case where a dependency is public only if a feature is enabled.

> The warning/error is emitted even when a `pub` item isn't accessible.

Reviewer 7: This would be less painful if inaccessible `pub` items were less commonplace. There's already the allow-by-default `unreachable_pub` lint that people can opt into to find and remove inaccessible `pub`s, but it can be needlessly noisy: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/112615

Author: Note that we at least avoid his for bins, examples, etc because we won't tell rustc that any of the dependencies are private.  I've added a note about that to this section (its already noted in the Reference section).

Reviewer 8: The other thing about inaccessible pub is that you have the sealed trait trick which (in some cases) will pull in seemingly-public deps as private because it's a sealed trait.

Probably not a big deal, but worth mentioning that this one use case does  exist.  At least with Rust as it is now, I have yet to find a workaround for sealed traits in the cases where they're applicable.

Reviewer 3: Well, #3323 was merged, right?
